CHAPTER

TWO

HISTORY OF GEANT4

These ideas first appeared in two studies done independently at CERN and KEK in 1993. Both groups sought to
investigate how modern computing techniques could be applied to improve the existing FORTRAN based Geant3
simulation program. Activities were merged in the fall of 1994 and a formal proposal, RD44, to construct an entirely
new program based on object-oriented technology was submitted to CERN’s Detector Research and Development
Committee. The initiative grew to become a large international collaboration of physicist programmers and software
engineers from a number of institutes and universities participating in a range of high-energy physics experiments
in Europe, Japan, Canada and the United States. The objective was to write a detector simulation program which
had the functionality and flexibility necessary to meet the requirements of the next generation of subatomic physics
experiments. The initial scope quickly widened when it became apparent that such a tool would also benefit the
nuclear, accelerator, space and medical physics community, with more individuals joining from these fields of science.
The RD44 project represented a pioneering effort in redesigning a major CERN software package for a modern objectoriented (OO) environment based on C++. The R&D phase was completed in December 1998 with the delivery of the
first production release. The collaboration was subsequently renamed Geant4 and reinstated on the basis of a formal
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed by many of the same national institutes, laboratories and large HEP
experiments who participated in RD44. The agreement addresses the program management, maintenance and user
support during the production phase and the continued development and refinement of the toolkit. It is subject to tacit
renewal every two years and sets out a collaboration structure defined by a Collaboration Board (CB), a Technical
Steering Board (TSB) and several working groups. In February 2006 a new MoU came into effect and CB and TSB
were renamed to Oversight Board (OB) and Steering Board (SB) respectively.
The collaboration now profits from the accumulated experience of many contributors to the field of Monte Carlo
simulation of physics detectors and physical processes. While geographically distributed software development and
large-scale object-oriented systems are no longer a novelty, Geant4, in terms of the size and scope of the code and the
number of contributors, may well represent the largest and most ambitious project of its kind outside the corporate
world. A clean overall problem decomposition has led to a clear hierarchical structure of domains. Every section of
the Geant4 software, which corresponds to a releasable component (library), is individually managed by a working
group of experts. In addition, there is a working group for each of the activities: testing and quality assurance, software
management and documentation management. A release coordinator heads each group. This consequent distribution
of responsibility among a relative large number of people permits a support structure whereby outside users can address
questions directly to the appropriate expert.

5

